chore: CRW-3429 - update docs for imagepuller (#2493)
codenvy/che-docs: modules/administration-guide/pages/defining-the-list-of-images-to-pull.adoc

[id="defining-the-list-of-images-to-pull"]
= Defining the list of images to pull

> The {image-puller-name-short} can pre-pull most images, including scratch images. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {image-puller-name-short} can pre-pull most images, including scratch images.

For faster workspace startup times, pre-pull workspace-related images such as `che-code`, `che-theia`, `che-machine-exec`, `che-theia-endpoint-runtime-binary`, and the Universal Developer Image (`udi`) images.

.Prerequisites

* The `podman` CLI tool.
* The `yq` CLI tool.
```

.Procedure

> . Get the latest {devworkspace} and {prod-short} operator bundle images, and use `podman` and `yq` to parse the related images from the ClusterServiceVersion YAML file in the /manifests/ folder to a simple list of container images:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Get the latest {devworkspace} and {prod-short} operator bundle images, and use `podman` and `yq` to parse the related images from the `ClusterServiceVersion` YAML file in the `/manifests/` folder to a simple list of container images:
```

Author: why `*` instead of `.` ? unordered list vs. ordered list?

Reviewer: If the procedure contains only one step, we use `*` instead of `1.`.

> ```
> cd /tmp && \
> curl -sSLkO https://raw.githubusercontent.com/redhat-developer/devspaces/devspaces-3-rhel-8/product/getRelatedImages.sh && \
> chmod +x getRelatedImages.sh && \
> ./getRelatedImages.sh -t {prod-ver-patch} -d {devworkspace-operator-version} --quiet
> 
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[subs="+attributes"]
----
$ cd /tmp && \
curl -sSLkO https://raw.githubusercontent.com/redhat-developer/devspaces/devspaces-3-rhel-8/product/getRelatedImages.sh && \
chmod +x getRelatedImages.sh && \
./getRelatedImages.sh -t {prod-ver-patch} -d {devworkspace-operator-version} --quiet
----
```

> . For faster workspace startup times, consider pre-pulling workspace related images such as `che-code`, `che-theia`, `che-machine-exec`, `che-theia-endpoint-runtime-binary`, and the Universal Developer Image (`udi`) images.

Reviewer: Removed suggestion.

Author: that's not a tip, that's the whole point of this document :D

Reviewer: It's interesting that it's at the very end, let me rework that.

[id="defining-the-list-of-images-to-pull"]
= Defining the list of images to pull

You can speed up workspace startup by using {image-puller-name-short} to pre-pull workspace-related images such as `che-code`, `che-machine-exec`, and the Universal Developer Image (`udi`) image.

.Prerequisites

* The `podman` CLI tool.
* The `yq` CLI tool.

.Procedure

> * Get the latest {devworkspace} and {prod-short} operator bundle images, and parse the related images from the `ClusterServiceVersion` YAML file in the `/manifests/` folder into a simple list of container images:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Get the latest {devworkspace} and {prod-short} operator bundle images, and parse the related images from the `ClusterServiceVersion` YAML file in the `/manifests/` folder into a simple list of container images:
+
```

[subs="+attributes"]
----
$ cd /tmp && \
curl -sSLkO https://raw.githubusercontent.com/redhat-developer/devspaces/devspaces-3-rhel-8/product/getRelatedImages.sh && \
chmod +x getRelatedImages.sh && \
./getRelatedImages.sh -t {prod-ver-patch} -d {devworkspace-operator-version} --quiet
----

> 

Reviewer 2: @nickboldt  @max-cx The script does not seem to work on OS X:

```
./getRelatedImages.sh -t 3.2 -d 0.16

[INFO] Using local quay.io/devspaces/devspaces-operator-bundle:3.2 (a7b1881d3b13)...
Error: open /dev/stdout: permission denied
find: /var/folders/yh/dtn4z9nd0cgf_y0trh7znd6m0000gn/T/tmp.VJs2Fa9N/quay.io-*-devspaces-operator-bundle-3.2-*/manifests/: No such file or directory
[INFO] Checking CSV:
Error: unknown shorthand flag: 'r' in -r
Usage:
  yq [flags]
  yq [command]
```

I have my doubts about replacing incomplete solution with a broken one. Can this be reconsidered?

Author: which `yq` do you have installed? If it's the mikefarah one, not the jq wrapper written in python, then you'll have a bad time. I can fluff up the script so it only works with the python based yq...

Author: but also +100, this was a simple prototype that would fetch images from CSVs that I tested on Fedora 36. I don't have an easy way to test on Apple hardware... but I could wrap the whole thing in a container ;) 

The other suggested approach is to implement this functionality inside chectl, so that it's platform agnostic.

Reviewer 2: Hi @nickboldt I reinstalled the yq with the python version but it still fails because of 
```
Error: open /dev/stdout: permission denied
```

Which I assume it's related to 
https://github.com/containers/podman/issues/12402
I am using Podman 4.3

It now fails with:
```
bash -x ./getRelatedImages.sh -t 3.2 -d 0.16
+ QUIET=
+ [[ 4 -gt 0 ]]
+ case $1 in
+ VERSION=3.2
+ shift 1
+ shift 1
+ [[ 2 -gt 0 ]]
+ case $1 in
+ DWO_VERSION=0.16
+ shift 1
+ shift 1
+ [[ 0 -gt 0 ]]
+ [[ ! -n 3.2 ]]
+ [[ ! -n 0.16 ]]
++ mktemp -d
+ TMPDIR=/var/folders/yh/dtn4z9nd0cgf_y0trh7znd6m0000gn/T/tmp.7QvlykqP
+ cd /var/folders/yh/dtn4z9nd0cgf_y0trh7znd6m0000gn/T/tmp.7QvlykqP
+ [[ ! -f /tmp/containerExtract.sh ]]
+ curl -sSLO https://raw.githubusercontent.com/redhat-developer/devspaces/devspaces-3-rhel-8/product/containerExtract.sh
+ chmod +x /var/folders/yh/dtn4z9nd0cgf_y0trh7znd6m0000gn/T/tmp.7QvlykqP/containerExtract.sh
+ EXTRACT_CMD='/var/folders/yh/dtn4z9nd0cgf_y0trh7znd6m0000gn/T/tmp.7QvlykqP/containerExtract.sh  --tmpdir /var/folders/yh/dtn4z9nd0cgf_y0trh7znd6m0000gn/T/tmp.7QvlykqP --delete-before --delete-after'
+ [[ 3.2 == \7\.* ]]
+ [[ 3.2 == \8\.* ]]
+ [[ 3.2 == \3\.* ]]
+ rm -fr '/var/folders/yh/dtn4z9nd0cgf_y0trh7znd6m0000gn/T/tmp.7QvlykqP/quay.io-*-devspaces-operator-bundle-3.2-*'
+ /var/folders/yh/dtn4z9nd0cgf_y0trh7znd6m0000gn/T/tmp.7QvlykqP/containerExtract.sh --tmpdir /var/folders/yh/dtn4z9nd0cgf_y0trh7znd6m0000gn/T/tmp.7QvlykqP --delete-before --delete-after quay.io/devspaces/devspaces-operator-bundle:3.2
[INFO] Using local quay.io/devspaces/devspaces-operator-bundle:3.2 (a7b1881d3b13)...
Error: open /dev/stdout: permission denied
++ find '/var/folders/yh/dtn4z9nd0cgf_y0trh7znd6m0000gn/T/tmp.7QvlykqP/quay.io-*-devspaces-operator-bundle-3.2-*/manifests/' -name '*csv.yaml'
find: /var/folders/yh/dtn4z9nd0cgf_y0trh7znd6m0000gn/T/tmp.7QvlykqP/quay.io-*-devspaces-operator-bundle-3.2-*/manifests/: No such file or directory
+ CSV=
+ [[ '' == '' ]]
+ echo '[INFO] Checking CSV: '
[INFO] Checking CSV:
+ yq -r '.spec.relatedImages[].image' ''
+ sort -uV
usage: yq [-h] [--yaml-output] [--yaml-roundtrip]
          [--yaml-output-grammar-version {1.1,1.2}] [--width WIDTH]
          [--indentless-lists] [--in-place] [--version]
          [jq_filter] [files ...]
yq: error: argument files: can't open '': [Errno 2] No such file or directory: ''
+ [[ '' == '' ]]
+ echo

+ rm -fr '/var/folders/yh/dtn4z9nd0cgf_y0trh7znd6m0000gn/T/tmp.7QvlykqP/quay.io-*-devworkspace-operator-bundle-0.16'
+ /var/folders/yh/dtn4z9nd0cgf_y0trh7znd6m0000gn/T/tmp.7QvlykqP/containerExtract.sh --tmpdir /var/folders/yh/dtn4z9nd0cgf_y0trh7znd6m0000gn/T/tmp.7QvlykqP --delete-before --delete-after quay.io/devworkspace/devworkspace-operator-bundle:0.16
[INFO] Using local quay.io/devworkspace/devworkspace-operator-bundle:0.16 (0cf26f525cb1)...
Error: open /dev/stdout: permission denied
++ find '/var/folders/yh/dtn4z9nd0cgf_y0trh7znd6m0000gn/T/tmp.7QvlykqP/quay.io-*-devworkspace-operator-bundle-0.16-*/manifests/' -name '*clusterserviceversion.yaml'
find: /var/folders/yh/dtn4z9nd0cgf_y0trh7znd6m0000gn/T/tmp.7QvlykqP/quay.io-*-devworkspace-operator-bundle-0.16-*/manifests/: No such file or directory
+ CSV=
+ [[ '' == '' ]]
+ echo '[INFO] Checking CSV: '
[INFO] Checking CSV:
+ yq -r '.spec.relatedImages[].image' ''
+ sort -uV
usage: yq [-h] [--yaml-output] [--yaml-roundtrip]
          [--yaml-output-grammar-version {1.1,1.2}] [--width WIDTH]
          [--indentless-lists] [--in-place] [--version]
          [jq_filter] [files ...]
yq: error: argument files: can't open '': [Errno 2] No such file or directory: ''
+ [[ '' == '' ]]
+ echo

+ cd /tmp
+ rm -fr /var/folders/yh/dtn4z9nd0cgf_y0trh7znd6m0000gn/T/tmp.7QvlykqP
```

If the script already requires docker/podman I believe containerizing would make most sense as it completely removes the risk of running into env specific issue.

It would be also nice if it supported configuring container engine, i.e. ./script .sh-ce DOCKER

Reviewer 2: I see you also mentioned `chectl`, that would be even better alternative. I still think this should be more of a supplementary solution and the real one should be improving the _default_ image list when image puller is enabled. For many use cases the default list would be a  great starting point already, so I'd prefer not to manually configuring it - especially if I will simply reuse output of `./getRelatedImages.sh`.

Author: re: podman, I use 4.3.0 too, but on fedora 36. I've also set it up to be rootless. https://github.com/containers/podman/blob/main/docs/tutorials/rootless_tutorial.md

you could also debug the containerExtract.sh script like this:

```
bash -x /var/folders/yh/dtn4z9nd0cgf_y0trh7znd6m0000gn/T/tmp.7QvlykqP/containerExtract.sh --tmpdir /var/folders/yh/dtn4z9nd0cgf_y0trh7znd6m0000gn/T/tmp.7QvlykqP --delete-before --delete-after quay.io/devspaces/devspaces-operator-bundle:3.2
```

Re: improving the _default_ image list https://github.com/che-incubator/kubernetes-image-puller/blob/main/deploy/openshift/configmap.yaml#L27 yes, that would be the best option, especially if chectl/dsc can just configure the imagepuller for you with the correct image set. 

HOWEVER at that point the assumption might be that you want ALL images pulled? What if you don't need theia and idea, and only want vscode?

Reviewer 2: Since VSCode will be the default choice soon (with theia going away and idea being a TP) I'd simply make sure vscode is part of the default list.

Author: agreed, vscode image should definitely be in the default list... my point was that the tool/solution needs some configuration to allow only pulling what you want (rather than pulling everything).

Here's another approach that @amisevsk wrote yesterday... haven't tested it yet. https://gist.github.com/amisevsk/9df020a46156b1824cd71a45785449aa

Reviewer 2: It would be interesting to combine these approaches. i.e. run your bash script inside the container as shown above. It  wouldn't need serviceAccount/RoleBindings, so the YAML would be quite minimal.  And it would give you a chance to review (==and pick&choose) those images before applying those, as the approach above directly sets those, rather silently. And it also removes any environmental factor, as the script is now running into a fixed environment all the time.

> [id="defining-the-list-of-images-to-pull"]
> = Defining the list of images to pull

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[id="configuring-image-puller-to-cache-images-for-faster-workspace-startup"]
= Configuring {image-puller-name-short} to cache images for faster workspace startup
```

Reviewer: Nick, if you change this, please don't forget to rename the file to `configuring-image-puller-to-cache-images-for-faster-workspace-startup.adoc` and update this file name also in `nav.adoc`.

> You can speed up workspace startup by using {image-puller-name-short} to pre-pull workspace-related images such as `che-code`, `che-machine-exec`, and the Universal Developer Image (`udi`) image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To speed up workspace startup, you can configure {image-puller-name-short} to cache workspace-related images such as `che-code`, `che-machine-exec`, and the Universal Developer Image (`udi`) image.
```

[id="defining-the-list-of-images-to-pull"]
= Defining the list of images to pull

> The {image-puller-name-short} can pre-pull most images, including scratch images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can speed up workspace startup by using {image-puller-name-short} to pre-pull workspace-related images such as `che-code`, `che-theia`, `che-machine-exec`, `che-theia-endpoint-runtime-binary`, and the Universal Developer Image (`udi`) images.
```

.Prerequisites

* The `podman` CLI tool.
* The `yq` CLI tool.

.Procedure

> * Get the latest {devworkspace} and {prod-short} operator bundle images, and use `podman` and `yq` to parse the related images from the `ClusterServiceVersion` YAML file in the `/manifests/` folder to a simple list of container images:

Author: ```suggestion
* Get the latest {devworkspace} and {prod-short} operator bundle images, and parse the related images from the `ClusterServiceVersion` YAML file in the `/manifests/` folder into a simple list of container images:
```
